README.md, before:

<!--
Copyright (C) 2024 Roberto Rossini <roberros@uio.no>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

# hictkR

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green)](./LICENSE)
[![CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkR/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkR/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

---

R bindings for hictk, a blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files.

## Installing hictkR

hictkR can be installed directly from GitHub.

Installing hictkR requires a compiler toolchain supporting C++17, such as:

- GCC 8+
- Clang 8+
- Apple-Clang 10.0+

On Windows a suitable compiler toolchain can be installed using [Rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/).

To install `hictkR` run the following command inside an `R` prompt:

```r
install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("paulsengroup/hictkR@v0.0.3")
```

## Using hictkR

```r
library(hictkR)

path <- "file.mcool"  # "file.hic"
f <- File(path, resolution=100000)

df <- fetch(f, "chr1:0-10,000,000", "chr2:0-20,000,000", join=TRUE)
df
```

| chrom1 | start1 | end1   | chrom2 | start2 | end2   | count |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ----- |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 0      | 100000 | 15    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 100000 | 200000 | 5     |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 300000 | 400000 | 17    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 400000 | 500000 | 22    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 500000 | 600000 | 30    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 600000 | 700000 | 21    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 600000 | 700000 | 21    |
| ...    | ...    | ...    | ...    | ...    | ...    | ...   |

Refer to the [manual](https://paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR/reference/index.html) and [vignette](https://paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR/articles/hictkR-vignette.html) available at
[paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR](https://paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR/) for more examples on how to use hictkR.

## Citing

If you use hictkR in you reaserch, please cite the following publication:

Roberto Rossini, Jonas Paulsen, hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files
_Bioinformatics_, Volume 40, Issue 7, July 2024, btae408, [https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408)

<details>
<summary>BibTex</summary>

```bibtex
@article{hictk,
    author = {Rossini, Roberto and Paulsen, Jonas},
    title = "{hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files}",
    journal = {Bioinformatics},
    volume = {40},
    number = {7},
    pages = {btae408},
    year = {2024},
    month = {06},
    issn = {1367-4811},
    doi = {10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    eprint = {https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/40/7/btae408/58385157/btae408.pdf},
}
```

</details>

Commit message:

Relicense package under the GPL-2.0-or-later LICENSE
We have to switch license because hictkR includes headers
from R and Rcpp, which are GPL-licensed.

README.md, after:

<!--
Copyright (C) 2025 Roberto Rossini <roberros@uio.no>

SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

This library is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Public License as published
by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License,
or (at your option) any later version.

This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Library General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Public License along
with this library.  If not, see
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
-->

# hictkR

[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/paulsengroup/hictkR)](./LICENSE)
[![CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkR/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkR/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

---

R bindings for hictk, a blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files.

## Installing hictkR

hictkR can be installed directly from GitHub.

Installing hictkR requires a compiler toolchain supporting C++17, such as:

- GCC 8+
- Clang 8+
- Apple-Clang 10.0+

On Windows a suitable compiler toolchain can be installed using [Rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/).

To install `hictkR` run the following command inside an `R` prompt:

```r
install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("paulsengroup/hictkR@v0.0.3")
```

## Using hictkR

```r
library(hictkR)

path <- "file.mcool"  # "file.hic"
f <- File(path, resolution=100000)

df <- fetch(f, "chr1:0-10,000,000", "chr2:0-20,000,000", join=TRUE)
df
```

| chrom1 | start1 | end1   | chrom2 | start2 | end2   | count |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ----- |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 0      | 100000 | 15    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 100000 | 200000 | 5     |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 300000 | 400000 | 17    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 400000 | 500000 | 22    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 500000 | 600000 | 30    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 600000 | 700000 | 21    |
| chr1   | 0      | 100000 | chr2   | 600000 | 700000 | 21    |
| ...    | ...    | ...    | ...    | ...    | ...    | ...   |

Refer to the [manual](https://paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR/reference/index.html) and [vignette](https://paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR/articles/hictkR-vignette.html) available at
[paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR](https://paulsengroup.github.io/hictkR/) for more examples on how to use hictkR.

## Citing

If you use hictkR in you reaserch, please cite the following publication:

Roberto Rossini, Jonas Paulsen, hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files
_Bioinformatics_, Volume 40, Issue 7, July 2024, btae408, [https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408)

<details>
<summary>BibTex</summary>

```bibtex
@article{hictk,
    author = {Rossini, Roberto and Paulsen, Jonas},
    title = "{hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files}",
    journal = {Bioinformatics},
    volume = {40},
    number = {7},
    pages = {btae408},
    year = {2024},
    month = {06},
    issn = {1367-4811},
    doi = {10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    eprint = {https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/40/7/btae408/58385157/btae408.pdf},
}
```

</details>
